from On the Equality of the Sexes Part I
Judith Sargent Murray

That minds are not alike, full well I know,
This truth each day's experience will show.

To heights surprising some great spirits soar,
With inborn strength mysterious depths explore;
Their eager gaze surveys the path of light,
Confessed it stood to Newton's piercing sight,
     Deep science, like a bashful maid retires,
And but the ardent breast her worth inspires;
By perseverance the coy fair is won,
And Genius, led by Study, wears the crown.

     But some there are who wish not to improve,
Who never can the path of knowledge love,
Whose souls almost with the dull body one,
With anxious care each mental pleasure shun.

Weak is the leveled, enervated mind,
And but while here to vegetate designed.

The torpid spirit mingling with its clod
Can scarcely boast its origin from God.

Stupidly dull—they move progressing on—
They eat, and drink, and all their work is done,
While others, emulous of sweet applause,
Industrious seek for each event a cause,
Tracing the hidden springs whence knowledge flows,
Which nature all in beauteous order shows.

     Yet cannot I their sentiments imbibe
Who this distinction to the sex ascribe,
As if a woman's form must needs enroll
A weak, a servile, an inferior soul;
And that the guise of man must still proclaim
Greatness of mind, and him, to be the same.

Yet as the hours revolve fair proofs arise
Which the bright wreath of growing fame supplies,
And in past times some men have sunk so low,
That female records nothing less can show.

But imbecility is still confined,
And by the lordly sex to us consigned.

They rob us of the power t'improve,
And then declare we only trifles love.

Yet haste the era when the world shall know
That such distinctions only dwell below.

The soul unfettered to no sex confined,
Was for the abodes of cloudless day designed.

     Meantime we emulate their manly fires,
Though erudition all their thoughts inspires,
Yet nature with equality imparts,
And noble passions, swell e'en female hearts.
